---
title: "Educated - Book Review"
promo_title: "What it takes to become educated?"
date: 2019-02-12
categories: [books]
teaser: "No one might have a powerful memory to capture every moment of their life growing up and repeat them perfectly without inherent biases, so read the book with a pinch of salt."
comments: true
---

{% include book-cover-image.md alt="Educated Book Cover" src="https://res.cloudinary.com/pradheap/image/upload/v1550036314/educated.jpg"
%}

{% include book-meta-card.html
    author='Tara Westover'
    pub_date='20 Feb, 2018'
    completed_on='12 Feb, 2019'
    pages='334'
    audio_book='12 hours 10 mins'
    isbn='9780399590504'
    css-classes="float-md-left mr-4"
%}

This is probably the first time I've read a memoir. Glad I picked it up. The book is about the author who was brought up in a very religious Mormon family (borderline extreme?), home-schooled by her mother in a place that feels far away from any civilization in Idaho. And it also covers her journey to get a formal education and how she overcame her old self and accepted her new educated self. I felt that some of the family members had a lot of luck during the terrible accidents mentioned in the book.

I can relate to a few of the anecdotes in the book as they for sure will resonate with someone who had grown up in a third world country. I'm surprised to find out that there are households in the USA that resemble third world-esque conditions. For example, I have had various identifications with different names growing up. I haven't really thought about that until I read this book.

I think her ability to teach herself and constantly update her world view are two biggest factors in her success. As no one might have a powerful memory to capture every moment of their life growing up and repeat them perfectly without inherent biases, so read any memoir with a pinch of salt.

My favorite quote: "I've had the patience to read things that I could not yet understand."

Do we have the patience?

Note: When I say 'Mormon', it feels like I know what I'm talking about, but I've very little knowledge about various Christian sects. Will try to read more on this!
